# IoT-based-Tracking-System-for-Emergency-Help
This project addresses the problem, “How can we ensure safety of an individual in an unforeseen vulnerable situation in the most efficient and reliable way?”. The system aims to minimize the lingering threat and to assure you of your personal safety using IoT. A lightweight, stand-alone device is created that can be added to your shoes. This device will continuously send your current GPS coordinates to a remote server every minute. It will consume very less data (some MBs in a month) and will have a battery life of about 80 hours or more than a week. In times of danger, the device can be triggered either manually or automatically. 

# About the system
The system a novel software sole which helps in tracking the client user. The location of the client will be updated every 15 seconds and gives an emergency tap by which he/she taps his/her both legs. This is the action which will trigger the software and send an emergency notification to the guardian user. It will also additionally provide real-time tracking of the client to the guardian in case he/she is in transit. With this, the guardian is capable of reaching the victim or the client within the golden time to offer rescue services.

The hardware consists of a GPS module, GSM module, RFID tag and a reader and NodeMCU. The NEO-6M GPS module which uses the GPS system, finds the location of the person. The in-built WiFi module in NodeMCU helps in sending the data acquired from the GPS module to the backend. The RFID tag is used to activate the system during emergency situations. The tag, when scanned against the reader, activates the GPS module which then sends the live location to the backend. The whole system is programmed in NodeMCU using an Integrated
Development Environment (IDE).

The hardware will initiate a Rest API call to our servers every 15 seconds. The backend will be responsible for updating the location in the database and keeping note of the last 5 locations. In case of an emergency, guardian users can log into the web/app which will get connected to a full duplex WebSocket connection with the backend which will update the live location in real-time and gives them shortest distance directions to reach them. If the client is in an emergency, they can trigger the system manually by tapping his/her feet together which will trigger the guardian with a push notification and message notification along with a live location tracking link within 3 seconds which helps the guardian in tracking them.
